Add guidelines about writing documentation (#35)
rust-lang/std-dev-guide: src/documentation/how-to-write-documentation.md

# How to write documentation

This document explains how to write documentation for the std/core public APIs.

Let's start with some general information:

### Contractions

> It is common in english to have contractions such "don't" or "can't". They can
> never be used in documentation. Always write their "full form":

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is common in English to have contractions such as "don't" or "can't". Do not
use these in documentation. Always write their "full form":
```

 * "do not" instead of "don't"
 * "cannot" instead of "can't"
 * "it would" instead of "it'd"
 * "it will" instead of "it'll"

>  * "you are" instead of "you are"

Reviewer 2: Presume you meant:

```suggestion
 * "you are" instead of "you're"
```

Author: Indeed, thanks!

>  * "he is"/"he has" instead of "he's"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * "they are" instead of "they're"
```

(Let's steer people towards the kinds of examples that should appear in documentation.)

>  * "they are" instead of "they're"

Author: I think the explanations I provided below provide explanations for it. Making documentation easier to read by reducing congestion like trying to figure out if `'d` is "had" or "should/would" doesn't seem like a bad idea. Until now we didn't have a guideline so it was to be expected. I don't see why it'd be an issue when writing new documentation though. Nothing prevents us to slowly update the existing documentation.

But maybe you had some other reasons?

>  * "they are" instead of "they're"

Reviewer 3: I'll point out: while there is no such thing as "standardized" english, only some of these contractions are  found in formal usage (don't, can't, it'll, it's, you're, they're are found, whereas 'd for should/would/had is not as much), and I cannot think of a single English contraction that is ambiguous in formal usage. Folks are more loose in chats/etc, but most modern English style guides allow contractions, and if anything it _reads weirdly_ if you omit them. Discouraging contractions seems rather weird.

>  * "they are" instead of "they're"

Author: I think I followed what the rustc errors do (which disallow contractions). Maybe I'm once again imagining things...

The only exception to this rule is "let's" as it is specific/known/common enough.

The reason is simply to make the reading simpler as many readers are not english

> native or could have reading issues.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The reason is simply to make the reading simpler for as many people as possible. 
``

### When to use inline code blocks

Whenever you are talking about a type or anything code related, it should be in a
inline code block. As a reminder, a inline code block is created with backticks
(\`). For example:

```text
This a `Vec` and it has a method `push` which you can call by doing `Vec::push`.
```

### When to use intra-doc links

Intra-doc links (you can see the full explanations for the feature
[here](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rustdoc/write-documentation/linking-to-items-by-name.html))
should be used as much as possible whenever a type is mentioned.

> Little note: when you are documenting an item, no need to link to it. So if you
> write documentation for `String::push_str` method, no need to link to the method
> `push_str` or to the `String` type.

Reviewer 5: This paragraph seems to be missing a few words.
```suggestion
Little note: when you are documenting an item, there is no need to link to it.
So, if you write documentation for the `String::push_str` method, there is
no need to link to the `push_str` method or the `String` type.
```

If you have cases like `Vec<String>`, you need to use intra-doc links on both
`Vec` and `String` as well. It would look like this:

```text
This is a [`Vec`]`<`[`String`]`>`.

> ```

Author: It makes the reading better. As such, I think it's a good enough reason.

(It's also something we enforced when the documentation team still existed too)

> ```

Reviewer 5: > It makes the reading better.

It don't think it does. It just adds more noise with the changes in color/formatting.

If both `A` and `B` are very relevant, then it might make sense to link them separately in `A<B>`. But quite often `B` isn't very relevant, and it's fine and less noisy to just link all of `A<B>` to `A`.

Regardless, this is guideline is not uncontroversial. It's fine to document and merge guidelines in to std-dev-guide that we already follow, by documenting existing practice. But new rules that we don't currently follow should first have some discussion and a decision.

Right now, we have exactly _one_ doc comment that uses the syntax ``  [..]`<`[..]`>` ``.

> Extra explanations: since both `Vec` and `String` are in codeblocks, `<` and `>`

Author: TIL, thanks!

> Extra explanations: since both `Vec` and `String` are in codeblocks, `<` and `>`

Author: Wikipedia seems to say it's countable: https://simple.wiktionary.org/wiki/explanation whereas oxford dictionary says it's both: https://www.oxfordlearnersdictionaries.com/definition/english/explanation :laughing:

> Extra explanations: since both `Vec` and `String` are in codeblocks, `<` and `>`

Author: Tricky language. Thanks for the explanation!

should as well, otherwise it would render badly.

### Code blocks

> With rustdoc, code blocks are tested (because considered as Rust code blocks by

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
With rustdoc, code blocks are tested (because they are treated as Rust code blocks by
```

default). It allows us to know if the documentation is up to date. As such,

> please avoid to use `ignore` as much as possible on code blocks! If you want to

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
please avoid using `ignore` as much as possible on code blocks! If you want to
```

> write into another language than Rust, simply set it in the code block tags:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
write as a language other than Rust, simply set it in the code block tags:
```

    ```text
    This is not rust code!
    ```

Some special cases:
 * If the code example cannot be run (when documenting a I/O item for example),
   use `no_run`.
 * If it is expected to fail, use `should_panic`.
 * If it is expected to fail compilation (which be quite rare!), use `compile_fail`.

You can find more information about code blocks
[here](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rustdoc/write-documentation/documentation-tests.html).

## How to write documentation for a module

A module is supposed to contain "similar" items. As such, its documentation is
supposed to give an overview and eventually **a base** to understand what the
items it contains are doing.

You can take a look at the
[f32 module](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/std/f32/index.html) or at the
[fmt module](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/std/fmt/index.html) to see

> both cases.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
good examples.
```

## How to write documentation for functions/methods

The basic format of each documented methods/functions should roughly look like this:

```text
[explanations]

[example(s)]
```

### Explanations

By `explanations` we mean that the text should explain what the method and what
each of its arguments are for. Let's take this method for example:

```rust
pub fn concat_str(&self, s: &str) -> String {
    if s.is_empty() {
        panic!("empty concat string");
    }
    format!("{}{}", self.string, s)
}
```

The explanation should look like this:

```text
Returns a new [`String`] which contains `&self` content with `s` added at the end.
```

### Panic?

If the function/method can panic in certain circumstances, it must to be
mentioned! This explanation needs to be prepended by a `Panics` title:

```text
# Panics

`concat_str` panics if `s` is empty.
```

### Examples

As for the examples, they have to show the usage of the function/method. Just

> like the `panic` section, they need to be prepended by a `Examples` title.

Author: I don't remember the debate behind this (I think @manishearth was involved in this debate? Please correct me if I'm wrong!) but it's what we already recommend in the [rustdoc book](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rustdoc/how-to-write-documentation.html#documenting-components). I'm fine with updating both though if needed.
